url:https://www.lemonde.fr/en/opinion/article/2024/03/13/the-virtues-of-a-debate-on-ukraine-in-the-assemblee-nationale_6614758_23.html
name:     Editorial    The virtues of a debate on Ukraine in the Assemblée Nationale The bilateral security agreement between Paris and Kyiv was approved by a large majority of MPs on March 12. The debate remained appropriate, and the outcome of the vote was reassuring. 
content:The debate and vote held on Tuesday, March 12, in the Assemblée Nationale on France's strategy for supporting Ukraine raised all kinds of fears. Not only has the European election campaign naturally heightened tensions, but Emmanuel Macron's recent controversial statements that he would not rule out sending Western troops to Ukraine could have served as an excuse for his detractors to express their defiance. However, while the president's stance has been widely criticized  – with some deeming it dangerously "war-mongering" and others considering it counter-productive because of the divisions it has sparked among his allies – the debate remained constructive. And the outcome of the vote was reassuring.The France-Ukraine security agreement, signed on February 16, was approved by 372 votes to 99. Designed for a 10-year period, it includes a strengthening of military cooperation, particularly in the fields of artillery and air defense.In addition to its clear outcome, the virtues of this debate lay in the educational tone of some of its speakers. Despite two years of heroic resistance, Ukraine is in a difficult situation. Vladimir Putin's imperialism is such a threat to democracies and peace on the continent that the future of Europe hangs on its fate. Jean-Louis Bourlanges, the MoDem (center) president of the Assemblée's Foreign Affairs Committee, explained in a very didactic way just how there is "peril," pointing to the risk of Europe being "discredited and humiliated" by a Russian victory. Prime Minister Gabriel Attal insisted on the "concrete" and "tangible" upheavals that the French would suffer in their daily lives, with a predictable surge in grain and gas prices.Politically, it was the left that came out of the debate as most divided: Driven by the same rejection of Atlanticism and the same exaltation of peace, La France Insoumise (radical left) and the Parti Communiste chose to vote against this strategy of support for Ukraine; while the Parti Socialiste and the Greens (left) resolutely endorsed it. This dissension has been accepted during the European election campaign – with each party running its own list. But it is likely to be an issue in the run-up to the 2027 French presidential election, when the left will attempt to coalesce around a common candidate. In a world in crisis, the international stakes are increasingly important and call for clarity.However, it was precisely in order to avoid this that the Rassemblement National (far right) chose to hide behind a vote of abstention. To disguise her embarrassing pro-Russian bias, Marine Le Pen expressed "her respect and support for a nation under aggression" – all while citing all kinds of reasons not to support the agreement: a rejection of Ukraine's NATO accession, the fear of a weakening of France's agriculture, a desire not to deprive the French army of resources and her condemnation of the president's verbal "bellicosity," which is hampering any chance of negotiation.Her arguments were dismantled one after the other by members of the Macron-aligned bloc. And her charge against the president – who has been accused of "instrumentalizing" support for Ukraine in an attempt to lump his opponents into the "pro-Putin" camp – hardly convinced anyone beyond her own party members. Despite criticizing the president, Les Républicains (right) MPs unreservedly voted in favor of the agreement. Macron, who is due to speak on television on Thursday has kept the last word on this essential subject for himself.