url:https://www.lemonde.fr/en/obituaries/article/2024/03/13/philippe-de-gaulle-i-never-saw-my-father-feel-like-laughing-out-loud_6613763_15.html
name:     Document    Subscribers only   Philippe de Gaulle: 'I never saw my father feel like laughing out loud' In the 2003 book about Charles de Gaulle, his son Philippe, who died on March 13, lifted the veil on some little-known facts about the former president's political and family life. 
content:The eldest son of French Resistance leader Charles de Gaulle has died on Wednesday, March 13, at 102 years old. In his book De Gaulle, mon père ("De Gaulle, My Father"), Philippe de Gaulle lifted the veil on some little-known events from the former French president's political and family life. The following excerpts are taken from the first volume of this book of interviews with the journalist Michel Tauriac:It was at the end of the war, in 1945. I was 24 at the time. I had just left the fusiliers marins and was preparing to join my naval aeronautics training course in the United States. I had been granted three months' leave, the first since the start of the war, and my former classmates from Stanislas [a school in Paris] had invited me to go out with some young girls. I was staying with my parents. We got home at one in the morning. My father got angry. He scolded, "So, you've got nothing better to do than go out on the town and lead a life of chair-sticks?" Like my mother, he feared – as he later admitted to me – that I'd become involved with a girl who wouldn't have suited their eyes. (...)From time to time, I had to put up with a bit of vexation [from various people]. Sometimes I'd get a few jibes, like "How are you, provisional son?", because of my father's recent creation of the provisional government of the Republic in 1944. It didn't go very far, but it was annoying. Some of them also invented nicknames.Because when you can't do anything about someone, you use irony or derision. As I understand it, this sobriquet was derived – who knows why! – from the La Rochefoucauld family, whose ancestor, who bore this first name and the title of duke, was head of the Beaux-Arts under the July Monarchy [1830-1848], and was derided for having, it seems, decided to lengthen the dresses of the dancers at the Opéra... He certainly left the memory of a character ridiculous enough for my mockers to have had the idea of drawing inspiration from him. (...)[My father] wasn't funny every day, but he had very pleasant moments when, without laughing out loud himself – I never saw him feel like it – he'd train me to do it (...). Sometimes, always in patois, he would sing "P'tit Quin-Quin" [a nursery rhyme in the Ch'tin, a northern regional language]. "It's a sad song, 'P'tit Quin-Quin'," he taught me. "Soldiers used to sing it during the war [of 1914-1918] because they were homesick." He had sung it a lot as a child, with the children of the farmers and miners in the suburbs of Lille, people who often spoke only Flemish. [Raised in Paris, Charles de Gaulle would return to visit his maternal grandmother in Lille – where he was born in 1890 – during school vacations].