url:https://www.lemonde.fr/en/opinion/article/2024/03/15/on-ukraine-aid-macron-walks-a-tightrope_6621940_23.html
name:     Editorial    On Ukraine aid, Macron walks a tightrope In an interview on television, the French president sought to prepare public opinion for increased, long-term support for Kyiv, while avoiding provoking them by announcing the transition to a genuine war economy. 
content:Two days after the Assemblée Nationale voted on the security agreement between Paris and Kyiv, President Emmanuel Macron had his heart set on addressing the French people directly. He did so in a television interview, on Thursday, March 14, seeking to explain what was at stake for Europe in the Russian war in Ukraine, and to convince them of the gravity of the situation.So it was as the commander-in-chief of the French armed forces that Macron answered questions on France's two main TV channels, TF1 and France 2. He sought to remain above the fray, even as the European elections campaign has just got underway. His words were chosen to make a strong impact on public opinion –  "an existential war for Europe and for France" – and to describe the cost to them that a victory for the aggressor country, Russia, would represent: "Europe's credibility would be reduced to zero (...) French people's lives would change. We would no longer have security in Europe. The security of the French is at stake over there." Recalling the difficulties Ukraine is currently facing, the president warned: "This start to 2024 must be the time to wake up."This realization was, in fact, already well underway. On February 26, at the end of an international conference on support for Ukraine held at the Elysée, Macron's decision not to rule out sending Western troops to the country created a major shock, worried his allies, soured his relationship with Germany and opened him up to attacks from his opponents, who accused him of being a "warmonger" and of dividing rather than uniting. He had to set things right.Without contradicting himself on the substance of his statements, and saying he regrets that Ukraine's allies had in recent months "put too many limits" on their "vocabulary," he sought to counter the impression that France was becoming isolated by highlighting the support he had received, notably from Czech and Lithuanian leaders, for his idea of "strategic ambiguity." Above all, he denied any bellicose intention towards Russia and its people, placing "the blame" on Vladimir Putin, who has so far taken the initiative in escalating the situation. France, he asserted, was fighting for peace, but "peace does not mean the capitulation of Ukraine, nor its partition."Such is the tightrope that Macron is walking: He wants to explain to the French public that times have changed, that the days of carefree thinking are over, but without provoking them; preparing the country for increased, long-term support for Ukraine, without announcing the "blood, sweat and tears" that the transition to a genuine war economy would entail.While awareness of the reality of the Russian threat may be growing among the French as a whole, their refusal to become directly involved in the conflict remains strong, and their fear of what they could lose is easily exploited during electoral periods. Against a backdrop of tension over the national debt and the need to find savings, Macron has once again turned to Europe for a solution. To finance military aid to Ukraine, he has backed the Estonian proposal for a European loan, along the lines of the one that enabled the gigantic post-Covid recovery plan. If he is to succeed, he will need to win over his European partners, whom he has deliberately upset with his talk of sending troops to Ukraine. At home and abroad, the effort to explain the situation is essential.