url:https://www.lemonde.fr/en/opinion/article/2024/03/09/france-and-germany-have-a-duty-to-act-in-unison_6600580_23.html
name:     Editorial    France and Germany have a duty to act in unison Europe is watching Paris and Berlin with growing dismay as Olaf Scholz and Emmanuel Macron exchange bitter words about their differences over the war in Ukraine. It is urgent to put an end to this. 
content:A pillar of the European project since its birth in the 1950s, the French-German relationship has been more or less fruitful and more or less cordial, depending on the leaders in charge and the crises that the two countries have faced, together or separately. The duo has been described as a "tandem," an "engine," a "couple" – each name corresponding to the degree of dynamism or amicability at a given time in this relationship unique in contemporary history.Today, the engine has broken down at a crucial moment, and the relationship shows all the symptoms of a partnership in crisis. The problem goes far beyond the relationship difficulties between Chancellor Olaf Scholz and President Emmanuel Macron. The two men may have very different temperaments, but it is not the first time this has happened in the French-German relationship.The current stalemate stems primarily from the situation created in Europe by Russia's large-scale invasion of Ukraine on February 24, 2022. Scholz immediately understood that this event signified an "epochal change," which he described in a historic speech to the Bundestag three days later. He announced a number of radical measures. But he may not have anticipated the scale of the challenges this epochal change would impose on his country.The three-party coalition government (Social Democratic Party, Greens, Liberal Party) headed by Scholz was formed just a few months before the war, and the coalition agreement on which it was based was drawn up in an entirely different context. The economic impact of the Ukrainian crisis, in particular, has undermined the coalition. The political landscape has fragmented considerably over the past two years, marked by the rise of the far-right Alternative for Germany party, the emergence of small radical parties, and the weakening of the major parties.The domestic political position of Macron, who is deprived of a majority in Parliament and also faces a rising far right, is hardly more comfortable, even if the nature of the French political system gives the president more leeway than the German chancellor. This makes it difficult to provide joint leadership for Europe. Facing the challenge of a devastating war waged by Russia on the doorstep of the European Union and NATO complicates the task even more so.There is no doubt that Scholz and Macron are united on the objective of helping Ukraine repel Russian aggression. It's the means of achieving this goal that they disagree on, more and more openly. Their European partners are watching with growing dismay the bitter exchanges between the two leaders, in public or at meetings, on the comparison of the amounts of arms deliveries to Ukraine, on the debate about sending troops, and on the "cowardice" of one or the other.France and Germany have different approaches to war and different strategic philosophies. Scholz sees no salvation for Europe outside its anchoring with the United States, while Macron calls for a European sovereignty. The weight of history is inevitable. But Europe will not be able to face up to the challenges of a world in upheaval if the German chancellor and the French president refuse to make the effort to act in unison on a subject as existential as war on their continent.